The hygiene package has given rise to debate in several Member States, including Sweden.
In the great majority of cases, however, the problem has not been the legislation in itself but the implementation of the legislation by the national authorities.
The EU is sacrificing public health for the sake of the profits of European monopolies, which are demanding fewer checks and restraints.
On the pretext of reducing administrative costs for small businesses, the Commission proposes to make yet another exception to the Food Safety Directive, which in itself is inadequate.
Checks on food will be made even more difficult because large multinationals are using monopolies to hide behind in order to avoid any responsibility while carrying on activities that are dangerous and very damaging to public health.
Safe food, in sufficient quantities and at low prices for the workers, is unlikely to be available unless there is a shift in EU policy that serves the interests of the food multinationals and the increase in their profits.
in writing. - (PT) I voted against the Schnellhardt report on the hygiene of foodstuffs because I consider that the Commission's proposed amendment of Regulation (EC) No 852/2004, aimed at exempting small and medium-sized enterprises operating in the food sector from the application of the HACCP (Hazard Analysis and Critical Control Point) system, is not currently justified given that to date there is no evidence of specific problems with the application of this procedure.
I consider that 2009, the date when this Regulation must be reviewed, would be the right time to propose any amendments, if they are justified.
in writing. - (PT) The European Parliament today adopted, at first reading, a report on the exemption of food business operators from the Regulation on the hygiene of foodstuffs.
This exemption shall apply to micro-enterprises which sell foodstuffs and not to supermarkets or franchised supermarket chains.
Experience in Portugal shows that this exemption is essential both to defend traditional gastronomy and its associated habits and customs, and to protect family enterprises, which represent a large part of the workers in this sector and which are the ones facing the most difficulties given the competitive imbalance with large groups.
While it is true that the legislation on foodstuffs must guarantee a high level of protection for the lives and health of people and the interests of consumers, this cannot be confused with the end of traditions and attacks on the gastronomic culture of each country and each region.
in writing. - The EU's regulations on the hygiene of foodstuffs are of importance across the Member States.
They have however at times proven to be somewhat burdensome on smaller businesses.
I welcome the proposals to exempt micro-enterprises and accordingly voted in favour of the Schnellhardt report.
The report introduces several changes concerning small and medium-sized enterprises producing and selling food, operating on regional and local markets.
These are not veterinary regulations.
The HACCP system provides a hazard analysis and a critical control point method.
It was developed in the US in the 1960s by NASA, when the Agency needed to ensure 100% safety of all foodstuffs and nutritional products.
In 1992 the system was incorporated into European legislation.
The Food Code of the Slovak Republic refers to HACCP as 'Proper Production Practice'.
Preparing documentation is complicated and owners of micro-enterprises are discouraged from doing business by unjustifiable bureaucracy.
Since the hygiene regulations in Slovakia are far stricter than those in the 15 old Member States, it is necessary to harmonise the hygiene rules across the entire EU.
in writing. - (IT) Mr President, ladies and gentlemen, I support Horst Schnellhardt's proposal on the hygiene of foodstuffs.
This proposal addresses two distinct problems: firstly, reducing red tape in respect of transport costs and conditions, and secondly, adjusting the rules exempting micro-enterprises from the requirements deriving from the HACCP system, aimed at guaranteeing the maximum degree of food safety and ensuring a high level of protection for human life and health, as well as for consumer interests.
I agree that the HACCP procedures should remain in place: their removal would lessen the likelihood of achieving these objectives, given that the procedures serve the interests of food business operators, enhance food safety standards and levels of responsibility, and guarantee fair competition and flexibility in the free movement of foodstuffs and feedingstuffs intended for consumption within the Community.
This amendment should, lastly, be extended to and approved by all Member States without exception, laying down safety requirements in no uncertain terms.
in writing. - (NL) Mr President, if we mean well toward small and medium-sized enterprises, we have to pass laws that they are also able to comply with.
That also applies to the hygiene regulations for the food sector.
Last year the Commission presented a proposal to amend the provisions of Regulation (EC) No 852/2004 to bring them more into line with what is achievable for the smallest enterprises.
The amendments proposed by the Commission are very useful because they still require small companies to meet hygiene standards but at the same time they relieve them of red tape and of the obligations that are genuinely not feasible for small businesses.
On the one hand, it is unfortunate that Parliament has not completely followed the Commission.
On the other hand, I voted for the final report because we have been able to make some progress towards a solution.
I still regret the fact that the responsibility is being shifted on to the Member States.
Member States will now have to take up their responsibility and allow their small and medium-sized enterprises to depart from the strict HACCP requirements.
in writing. - (RO) The Regulation No 11 on eliminating discrimination in terms of tariffs and transport conditions requires carriers to hold a transport document which should contain, among others, the distances, routes and borders passage points.
In the field of transportations, the proposal aims at the reduction of certain obligations to provide statistics in the transportations field.
Yet, as far as this modification is concerned, only the European Parliament has been consulted.
I voted for amendment no.
12, submitted by the European Socialist Group, afferent to Regulation (EC) No 852/2004 on the hygiene of foodstuffs, in which the competent bodies are allowed to exempt economic agents in the foods sector from the implementation of one or several of the imposed measures, provided that these bodies are capable of proving that there is no risk that must be avoided, or that all identified risks are sufficiently and regularly controlled by means of application of the general and special requirements of hygiene of foodstuffs.
This refers to bakeries, butcheries, fruit and vegetables shops and, mainly, to market stands.
I regret the fact that this amendment did not gather the necessary majority.
The quality of goods and services is becoming an issue of increasing importance to European society.
Quality is a factor in competition between enterprises.
One way is which quality is demonstrated is through possession of the relevant certificate of compliance with quality standards.
The HACCP system was officially accepted by the World Health Organisation in 1975.
However, the two products on list B of Annex II may be used under certain conditions.
The Commission's amendment proposes:
to exclude pet animals from the scope of this Directive, which means that prohibitions on the use of certain substances simply do not apply any more to them and they may therefore be treated with these substances;
that the hormone oestradiol 17 ß which was temporarily allowed to be used for farm animals for the treatment of foetus maceration or mummification or for pyrometer will now be banned completely.
The fourth application for oestrus induction in cattle, horses, sheep or goats was granted only until October 2006 and has already expired.
This substance is considered to be carcinogenic and alternatives now exist on the market so that the use of this hormone is redundant and can be banned completely.
in writing. - (PT) The Commission proposes to exclude pet animals from the scope of Council Directive 96/22/EC which would enable their treatment with substances having a thyrostatic action and with beta-agonists.
This important measure is intended to reduce the suffering of pet animals and will allow the use, for example, of substances having a thyrostatic action for the treatment of hyperthyroidism in these animals.
However, the most recent developments in scientific assessment tell us that using these substances is economically unattractive in animal production for human consumption or can be replaced with alternative substances.
It is therefore proposed to prohibit entirely the use of oestradiol 17 ß and its esters in animal production for human consumption, putting an end to the various derogations that still exist today.
I would point out that these hormones, when used to promote growth, can be carcinogenic to human beings and that the existing derogations can finally be ended as these hormones can be replaced with alternative substances without any problems.
These changes will ensure a high level of protection for consumers of meat and animal derivatives while at the same time allowing the treatment and reduction of suffering of pet animals.